Resolve layout of single variant enums (#159)
rust-lang/unsafe-code-guidelines: reference/src/layout/enums.md

}
```

### Layout of single variant enums

> **Single variant data-carrying*** enums without a `repr()` annotation have the

Reviewer: Have we defined this precisely enough that people will not confuse this with "enums where only a single variant carris data"?

Author: The definition of data-carrying and fieldless enums is at the beginning of the document. This PR uses "data-carrying" and "fieldless" with the meaning of those definitions. 

Whether the definitions themselves are clear enough or not, I don't know. They were clear to me, e.g., they explicitly call out that `enum E { Varian0(Data) }` is data-carrying even if `Data` is a ZST and `E` has size zero, and they also call out that `enum F { Variant0, Variant1 }` is fieldless even though its size is not zero. 

One can always improve the definition to make them more clear, but that should probably happen in a different PR. I kind of wish that these two definitions had their place in the glossary as well.

Reviewer 2: "data carrying" on its own isn't very clear, but when paired with "fieldless" it becomes (i think) very clear.

Author: I'm resolving this conversation. If someone wants to improve the definitions of "fieldless" and "data-carrying" at the beginning of this document or in the glossary PRs welcome. If someone wants to discuss renaming "data-carrying" enums to something else, please open an issue. This PR is not the place to do either.

Reviewer: I think the way you are stacking adjectives here is juts not very clear. "Data-carrying enums with a single variant" would be better, IMO.

same layout as the variant field. **Single variant fieldless** enums have the
same layout as a unit struct.

Here:

```rust
# use std::mem::{size_of, align_of};
struct UnitStruct;
enum SingleVariantFieldless { FieldlessVariant }
# fn main() {
assert_eq!(size_of::<SingleVariantFieldless>(), size_of::<UnitStruct>());
assert_eq!(align_of::<SingleVariantFieldless>(), align_of::<UnitStruct>());
// assert_eq!(call_abi_of::<SingleVariantFieldless>(), call_abi_of::<UnitStruct>());

> // assert_eq!(niches_of::<SingleVariantFieldless>(), niches_of::<UnitStruct>());

Reviewer: What is the point of these commented-out assertions?

Author: We don't have any way to check those aspects of layout in code, so they are pseudo-code for that. I can remove them, since these are already implied when the text says "have the same layout". I thought the assertions made it clearer that by layout we meant _layout_.

Reviewer 2: They're good asserts, and hopefully some day they'll be real rust functions as well

Reviewer: The fact that they are commented out could also be interpreted as "this does not currently hold", as one would do in a test suite.

So, it should be made clearer that they are commented out just because the methods don't exist. Probably stating "these things are the same" as Rust asserts is not the clearest way anyway, and it *is* very verbose.

# }
```

the single-variant fieldless enum `SingleVariantFieldless` has the same layout
as `UnitStruct`.

Here: 

```rust
# use std::mem::{size_of, align_of};
struct SomeStruct { x: u32 }
enum SingleVariantDataCarrying {
  DataCarryingVariant(SomeStruct),
}
# fn main() {
# assert_eq!(size_of::<SingleVariantDataCarrying>(), size_of::<SomeStruct>());
# assert_eq!(align_of::<SingleVariantDataCarrying>(), align_of::<SomeStruct>());
# }
```

the single-variant data-carrying enum `SingleVariantDataCarrying` has the same
layout as `SomeStruct`.

### Layout of multi-variant enums with one inhabited variant

> The layout of **multi-variant** enums with **one inhabited variant** is the same

Reviewer: Have we defined "inhabited" sufficiently precisely for this?

I am a bit worried about the details of this definition.

Author: There is no definition of uninhabited or inhabited types anywhere in the reference. 

What worries you about this definition ? If only one variant is inhabited, all other variants are uninhabited, and there can be no value of the enum that contains any of those variants, according to all definitions of uninhabited types that I can imagine.

Reviewer: There are at least three different kinds of "inhabited":
* Type tas a call ABI other than `Uninhabited`.
* The type's validity invariant is satisfiable.
* The type's safety invariant is satisfiable.

So, the term is ambiguous without further clarification.

Author: Are there types for which "The type's validity invariant is satisfiable" and the call ABI is `Uninhabited` ?

Reviewer: Good question! I don't know. `&!` might be such a type, depending on how the validity invariant discussions turn out.

Declaring that these two notions (the first two in my list) are equal would put a restriction on the validity invariant discussion: we would have to make sure that satisfiability is trivially computable and can be put into the rustc layout code. I think this would be a nice property to have, but I wouldn't want to assert now that we will end up there.

Author: We defined that `&T where T: Sized` has the same alignment and size as an `usize`. _I think_ this means that the call ABI of `&T where T: Sized` is `Scalar`. Is this correct? If so, for `&!` to have an `Uninhabited` call ABI `!` must not be `Sized`.

Author: So we might need to go back to the layout of pointers and references and require `where T: Sized + SomeFormOfInhabited`.

Reviewer: > If so, if &! has an Uninhabited call ABI then ! cannot be Sized, which would mean that any type containing a ! is not Sized..

Not really -- if an `&!` is impossible to construct, it doesn't really matter which call ABI we ascribe to it.

Reviewer: But this does indeed show that treating "uninhabited" as a call ABI might not be the best idea, at least in terms of teaching.

Author: > it doesn't really matter which call ABI we ascribe to it.

Then we don't have to give it Uninhabited as a call ABI, and we go back to my original question (Are there types for which "The type's validity invariant is satisfiable" and the call ABI is Uninhabited ?). 

---

We say in many places that `&T` and `*T` have the same call ABI when `T: Sized`, we would need to add exceptions for `&!` and `*!` if this is not the case. Also we do need to deal with types for which the call ABI of `&!` might matter, e.g., what's the call ABI of `Option<&!>` ? Ideally we want it to be compatible with `*!`, but I don't see how to make that happen if `&!` has a different call ABI than `*!`.

Reviewer: If we stop considering "uninhabited" a call ABI, what happens is that "layout" gets one more property: "inhabited".

So the first item of my list changes to "The type is considered inhabited in its layout".

Reviewer: > what's the call ABI of Option<&!>

Oh gosh, I have no idea.^^ Probably if we really made `&!` uninhabited that would become a ZST... ouch.

I am not sure what the right framework here is. But people have been bringing up that being able to optimize away methods taking `&!` (because they are dead code) could be very beneficial. That's the main motivation for caring about validity of the memory "behind" the reference in https://github.com/rust-lang/unsafe-code-guidelines/issues/77.

Author: Ok, so we really do need to work out the layout of uninhabited types before we do anything else here.

I do think that "inhabited", whatever that means, will need to hold here for this guarantee. Whether `&!` is inhabited or not, doesn't change anything here AFAICT.

Reviewer: Popping back up, I don't think we should talk about "(un)inhabited" types in these documents before we got those definitions set. So I am in favor of dropping this subsection.

> }

Reviewer: Can you edit (further up) the definition of "data carrying" to say "enums where at least one variant ..."? The current "Enums whose variants" is ambiguous IMO.

[niche]: ../glossary.html#niche

### Layout of enums with a single variant

> **NOTE**: the guarantees in this section have not been approved by an RFC process.

**Data-carrying** enums with a single variant without a `repr()` annotation have

> the same layout as the variant field. **Fieldless** enums with a single variant

Reviewer: This is deliberately still use the vague "same layout", right?

Author: Right. Making this more precise should be done as part of #153 (I'd like to merge this first, so that we can see the changes in 153 and discuss the naming there).

have the same layout as a unit struct. 

For example, here:

```rust
struct UnitStruct;
enum FieldlessSingleVariant { FieldlessVariant }

struct SomeStruct { x: u32 }
enum DataCarryingSingleVariant {
  DataCarryingVariant(SomeStruct),
}
```

* `FieldSingleVariant` has the same layout as `UnitStruct`,
* `DataCarryingSingleVariant` has the same layout as `SomeStruct`.

## Unresolved questions

See [Issue #79.](https://github.com/rust-rfcs/unsafe-code-guidelines/issues/79):
  

> * Layout of multi-variant enums with one inhabited variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Layout of multi-variant enums where only one variant is inhabited.
```
